docs: add istio mode API ADR (#3631)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/contributor/arch/037-istio-mode-configuration.md

#### Components Affected

All reconcilers that create or configure telemetry components must respect the `istio.enabled` setting:

1. OTLP Gateway Reconciler
   - Skip PeerAuthentication creation when Istio mode is off
   - Skip DestinationRule creation when Istio mode is off
   - Remove sidecar injection label when Istio mode is off

2. Metric Agent Reconciler
   - Skip Istio traffic routing annotations when Istio mode is off
   - Skip certificate volume mounts when Istio mode is off
   - Remove sidecar injection label when Istio mode is off

3. OTel Log Agent Reconciler
   - Remove sidecar injection label when Istio mode is off

4. Fluent Bit Reconciler
   - Remove sidecar injection label when Istio mode is off

5. NetworkPolicy Reconcilers
   - Omit Istio Envoy port (15090) from ingress rules when Istio mode is off

### Validation

Additional validation is enforced at the admission webhook level:

- When `istio.enabled: false`, validate that no MetricPipeline relies on scraping STRICT mTLS workloads (since the Metric Agent won't have Istio certificates) and no istio metrics scrape allowed

### Open Questions

> 1. Granular control per component: Should the API allow enabling/disabling Istio mode per component (for example, `istio.metricAgent.enabled`)?

Reviewer: If there is no mTLS required for the export, no component (besides metric-agent) requires a sidecar. The export is the only reason left for having a sidecar. Instead of explicitly disabling istio per component, it is more desirable to check the pipelines for some API elements and then decide if the sidecar needs to get turned on, like:

```yaml
output:
  otlp:
    istioIntereption: on
    endpoint: https://icke.com
```

So by default, assuming in no pipeline the flag is active, the components will not use a sidecar even if the central istio mode is on. Even the metric agent only needs a sidecar if there is a metricpipeline having `prometheus` or `istio` input enabled.

-> Have a central flag for enabling istio "auto" or "off" where it is set to "auto" by default. In the "auto" mode it will check the pipelines if anywhere a sidecar is needed and will enable it

Author: The new API proposal discussed and aligned, those questions are obsolete

## Current Istio Integration

### Istio Detection

The Telemetry Manager automatically detects Istio by checking for the presence of Istio CRDs (Custom Resource Definitions) in the cluster. Specifically, it looks for API groups matching `*.istio.io`.

### Component Behaviors

#### OTLP Gateway

The OTLP Gateway is deployed as a DaemonSet and serves as the unified ingress point for all telemetry signals (logs, traces, and metrics).

##### Unconditional (Always Applied)

| Resource | Behavior | Rationale |
|----------|----------|-----------|
| Pod Label | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"` | The OTLP Gateway always has Istio sidecar injection enabled to support outbound mTLS communication to in-cluster backends in the Istio mesh. |

##### Conditional (Only When Istio is Detected)

| Resource | Behavior | Rationale |
|----------|----------|-----------|

> | PeerAuthentication | PERMISSIVE mTLS mode | This configuration supports both plain-text and mTLS connections to the OTLP Gateway. This ensures applications can send data over plain-text (because of node-local ingestion), while still supporting mTLS for any direct cross-namespace access if needed. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| PeerAuthentication | PERMISSIVE mTLS mode | This configuration supports both plain-text and mTLS connections to the OTLP Gateway. This ensures applications can send data over plain-text (because of node-local ingestion), while still supporting mTLS communication. |
```

Does it make a difference whether the sending pod is in the same namespace or a different namespace?

> | DestinationRule | `TLS mode: DISABLE` for all OTLP Services | To ensure that other components like metric pipelines can connect without requiring mTLS, the OTLP Gateway receives telemetry data over plain-text on the ingestion path because of node-local routing. Disabling TLS for client connections to these services supports this requirement. |

Reviewer 2: what do you mean by "metric pipelines can connect without requiring mTLS"?
metric agents don't send metrics to the gateway anymore.

Author: Yes, it was more like an example. Removed

| NetworkPolicy (Ingress) | Additionally allows traffic on Istio Envoy telemetry port (15090) | When Istio is present, the sidecar's Envoy proxy exposes metrics that need to be scraped by monitoring systems. |

#### Metric Agent

The Metric Agent is deployed as a DaemonSet and scrapes Prometheus metrics from workloads in the cluster, then forwards them to configured backends.

##### Unconditional (Always Applied)

| Resource | Behavior | Rationale |
|----------|----------|-----------|
| Pod Label | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"` | The Metric Agent always has Istio sidecar injection enabled to support outbound mTLS communication to in-cluster backends in the Istio mesh. |

> ##### Conditional (Only When Istio is Detected)

Reviewer 2: also, when istio is active, we generate an additional scrape job ("app-services-secure") for scraping annotated Services over HTTPS. We should add it to the list here

Author: Agree, table updated

| Resource | Behavior | Rationale |
|----------|----------|-----------|
| Pod Annotation | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundIPRanges: ""` | Bypasses Istio sidecar interception for most outbound traffic. This is necessary because Prometheus scraping of Istio control plane and Envoy metrics requires direct access to metric endpoints, which are not reachable through the sidecar proxy. |
| Pod Annotation | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundPorts: "{backend_ports}"` | Ensures that traffic to configured backends (such as OTLP Gateway, in-cluster Prometheus, or other OTel Collectors) goes through the Istio sidecar for mTLS. The reconciliation loop populates this with the actual backend ports from MetricPipeline configurations. |

> | Pod Annotation | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/excludeInboundPorts: "8888"` | Excludes the metrics port from Istio sidecar interception, ensuring that the Metric Agent's own metrics can be scraped directly without mTLS overhead. |

Reviewer 2: don't we have similar annotation for other components as well when istio is active?

from a quick view in the golden test files:
fluentbit: `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/excludeInboundPorts: 2020,2021`
log agent: `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/excludeInboundPorts: "8888"`
gateway: `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeInboundPorts: ""`

Author: Yes, I miss them, tables updated

##### Conditional (Only When Istio is Detected)

No Istio-specific resources are created for the Self-Monitor because it explicitly disables sidecar injection.

## Summary Table

| Component | Sidecar Injection | Istio Certificates | Special Annotations | Istio-Specific Resources |
|-----------|-------------------|-------------------|---------------------|--------------------------|
| OTLP Gateway | Always enabled | Not used | None | PeerAuthentication (PERMISSIVE), DestinationRule (TLS DISABLE) |
| Metric Agent | Always enabled | Always mounted | Conditional (traffic routing) | None |
| OTel Log Agent | Always enabled | Not used | None | None |
| Fluent Bit | Always enabled | Not used | None | None |
| Self-Monitor | Always disabled | Not used | None | None |

## Proposed API

To provide explicit control over Istio integration, we propose adding an `istio` field to the Telemetry CR spec with an enum-based mode configuration. This field allows users to control Istio mode globally for all telemetry components.

### API Schema

```yaml
spec:
  istio:

>     mode: <AUTO | OFF>  # Default: AUTO

Reviewer 2: Is it intentional to have the possible values all caps?
In most kubernetes resources, fields with enum values use PascalCase style, for example:
> spec.type on Service: ClusterIP, NodePort, LoadBalancer
> spec.restartPolicy on Pod: Always, OnFailure, Never
> spec.concurrencyPolicy on CronJob: Allow, Forbid, Replace
> spec.imagePullPolicy: Always, IfNotPresent, Never
> spec.persistentVolumeReclaimPolicy: Retain, Recycle, Delete
> spec.accessModes on PVC: ReadWriteOnce, ReadOnlyMany, ReadWriteMany
> spec.preemptionPolicy: PreemptLowerPriority, Never

Author: Was not intentionally updated with PascalCase

```

- **AUTO**: Automatically detect whether Istio integration is needed using:
  - Presence of Istio CRDs (`*.istio.io`) in the cluster
  - Pipeline configurations that require Istio (for example, Metric Agent with Istio input, Prometheus input scraping Istio metrics)

>   - Application of Istio-specific resources when both Istio is present and pipelines require it

Reviewer 2: Let's have the detailed explanation of auto mode once.
Currently it is explained in 3 different places with different details: here, examples section and implementation impact section

Author: updated

- **OFF**: Disable Istio integration regardless of whether Istio is present in the cluster or pipelines require it

## User Examples

### Example 1: Auto-detection (Default Behavior)

Automatically detect Istio and apply integration:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.kyma-project.io/v1beta1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: default
  namespace: kyma-system
spec:
  istio:
    mode: AUTO  # This is the default
  metric:
    collectionInterval: 30s
```

Or simply omit the field (defaults to AUTO):

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.kyma-project.io/v1beta1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: default
  namespace: kyma-system
spec:
  metric:
    collectionInterval: 30s
```

**Behavior**: When `mode: AUTO` (or omitted), the system intelligently detects whether Istio integration is needed:

1. **Istio CRD Detection**: Checks if Istio CRDs (`*.istio.io`) are present in the cluster
2. **Pipeline Analysis**: Analyzes pipeline configurations to determine if they require Istio:

>    - MetricPipelines with Istio input enabled

Reviewer 2: why would we need to enable istio mode for metric agent if istio input is enabled? wasn't it possible to scrape istio metrics even when the metric agent was outside the service mesh?

>    - MetricPipelines with Prometheus input scraping Istio metrics

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by `Prometheus input scraping Istio metrics`?
Didn't we agree to enable istio mode for metric agent once the pormethus input is enabled? because it won't be trivial to determine if the pods in the included namespaces (from prometheus input) are running inside or outside the mesh

Author: This was a typo, I mean `Prometheus input scraping metrics`

>    - Pipelines targeting in-cluster backends that require mTLS

Reviewer 2: Didn't we agree to enable istio mode for the corresponding component once it is exporting telemetry to an in-cluster backend regardless whether it requires mtls or not? because it will also not be trivial to determine whether the in-cluster backend is inside or outside the mesh. Or do you have an easy way to determine that?

Reviewer: We also could explicitly have a flag on the output to explicitly request a sidecar by the user, might be better then guessing if it is in-cluster or not. And again, the flag would be effect-less if you disabled istio integration globally

Reviewer 2: @a-thaler that can work only for new pipelines and having that flag as a required field.
But, what will we do with the existing pipelines which don't have that flag?

That's why I would suggest to simplify it and just inject the sidecar to the relevant components once they are exporting to an in-cluster backend. And if the backend indeed doesn't require mtls, then the user can disable the global istio mode. Especially that the number of clusters with an in-cluster backend is a small percentage.

Author: updated as discussed

> 3. **Smart Activation**: Applies Istio-specific resources (sidecar injection, PeerAuthentication, DestinationRule, traffic annotations, certificate volumes) only when BOTH conditions are met:

Reviewer: It should differentiate: if we have internal cluster backends, the components which are serving the related pipelines need to have a sidecar interception for the configured export ports.
If metric scraping is on, the metric agent only needs a sidecar without any interception as we only need the certs.
That smart differentiation I cannot see anywhere in the document

Reviewer 2: I agree in general that we should apply the istio integration only to the needed components.

Reviewer 2: @a-thaler
```
if we have internal cluster backends, the components which are serving the related pipelines need to have a sidecar interception for the configured export ports.
```

Isn't the default behavior that once an istio sidecar is injected it intercepts all outbound traffic on all ports? Do you want to explicitly interecpt the outbound traffic only for the configured backend ports as an optimization?

Currently, we only add the annotation `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundPorts: "{backend_ports}"` to the metric agent, because it is the only component which has the annotation `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundIPRanges: ""`, so we need to add the backend ports back to the sidecar interception

Reviewer 2: @a-thaler
```
If metric scraping is on, the metric agent only needs a sidecar without any interception as we only need the certs.
```

Do you want then if the metric agent isn't exporting metrics to an in-cluster backend to remove the annotation `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundPorts: "{backend_ports}"` as an optimization to avoid the sidecar interception?

Author: updated as discussed

   - Istio is present in the cluster
   - At least one pipeline requires Istio integration

> If Istio is not present or no pipelines require it, no Istio-specific configurations are applied.

Reviewer: As we discussed several times, the kyma-system namespace has the istio-injection enabled. If we don't want to have sidecars, we acrively need to apply istio labelling, which contradicts the statement above.

Author: Why we should re-label `kyma-system` namespace, we will set the workload level label `sidecar.istio.io/inject` to `false`. Maybe there are some other workloads in the namespace `kyma-system` that rely on the namespace-level labeling

Reviewer: Setting an inject label to false I would classify as applying istio specific configuration, but you write "no Istio-specific configurations are applied." That is confusing.

### Example 2: Explicit Disable (Opt-out)

Force Istio mode off, even if Istio is detected in the cluster:

```yaml
apiVersion: operator.kyma-project.io/v1beta1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: default
  namespace: kyma-system
spec:
  istio:
    mode: OFF
  metric:
    collectionInterval: 30s
```

**Behavior**: 

> - No sidecar injection labels (`sidecar.istio.io/inject` set to `"false"`).

Reviewer: See my comment above, we need injection=false labels

Reviewer 2: It is stated between brackets `sidecar.istio.io/inject` set to `"false"`,  but stating that `No sidecar injection labels` is indeed confusing.

Let's just change it to something like: Set `sidecar.istio.io/inject` label to `false`

Author: Yes, agree, it is confusing. Changed to explicit set the value false

- No PeerAuthentication or DestinationRule resources created.
- No Istio traffic routing annotations.
- No Istio certificate volume mounts.

> - Metric Agent cannot scrape STRICT mTLS workloads (they require PERMISSIVE mode).

Reviewer: The agent "will" not scrape them as the feature is turned off. It it should be more clear here if it tries and fails ot if the config for that does not get generated

Author: Yes, the Prometheus receiver config `app-service-secure` is no longer valid when Istio mode is OFF. But the app target from mesh with `STRICT` mTLS not scrap-able

Reviewer: At the moment we are excluding istio-fied endpoints from the app target, will we continue doing it? Worth to write down, maybe have a section were you go into details on how the prometheus input will change from the behaviour

> - Istio metric scraping remains possible if Istio is present in the cluster.

Reviewer: As discussed already, isn't it more smart to fully disable the Istio input support in case istio is turned off?

Reviewer 2: @a-thaler but why do you want to disable the istio input if istio mode is off?

@hisarbalik tested it out and the metric agent was able to scrape the istio metrics even when the metric agent was outside the mesh.

I would say that scraping istio metrics and running the telemetry components insides/outside the mesh should be independent of each other

Reviewer: From a user experience, I simply would not expect that this will work. I disable the Istio integration and then use the istio input to get Istio metrics... I would say it is unexpected and no real scenario. By luck, we are currently not using real Istio features for the integration If in future we need to apply Istio resources to get the input working, that will fail.

So yes, technical it will work and we could do it, I just find it not intuitive, up to you

Reviewer 2: one possible scenario is a user who has his services inside the service mesh and wants to collect only runtime metrics and istio metrics, but doesn't want to collect prometheus metrics and the backends are external ones.

In that case, he doesn't need to run the telemetry components with istio sidecars, but still wants to enable the istio input.

Author: Istio metric scrape is still possible when the metric agent is not part of the service mesh. Technically is possible, being part of mesh and scraping mesh metrics are two different things in my opinion

### Implementation Impact

When `istio.mode` is set, the reconciliation logic changes as follows:

#### Detection Logic for AUTO Mode

When `mode: AUTO`, the system performs intelligent detection:

1. **Istio CRD Check**: Scan for Istio CRDs (`*.istio.io`) in the cluster
2. **Pipeline Analysis**: Check if any active pipelines require Istio:
   - MetricPipelines with `input.istio.enabled: true`
   - MetricPipelines with `input.prometheus` scraping Istio metrics (targets with `istio` labels)
   - Pipelines targeting in-cluster backends that are part of the Istio mesh
3. **Decision**: Enable Istio integration only if BOTH conditions are true:
   - Istio CRDs are present
   - At least one pipeline requires Istio integration

#### Components Affected

All reconcilers that create or configure telemetry components must respect the `istio.mode` setting:

1. OTLP Gateway Reconciler
   - When `mode: AUTO`: Apply Istio resources only if detection logic confirms Istio is needed
   - When `mode: OFF`: Skip PeerAuthentication creation, skip DestinationRule creation, set sidecar injection label to `false`

2. Metric Agent Reconciler

>    - When `mode: AUTO`: Apply Istio configurations only if detection logic confirms Istio is needed (Istio CRDs present AND pipelines with Istio/Prometheus inputs exist)

Reviewer 2: you missed here the case when there is an in-cluster backend. Let's just remove the brief explanation between brackets. We have the detailed explanation in another section.

Author: in-cluster case added

   - When `mode: OFF`: Skip Istio traffic routing annotations, skip certificate volume mounts, set sidecar injection label to `false`

3. OTel Log Agent Reconciler
   - When `mode: AUTO`: Apply sidecar injection only if detection logic confirms Istio is needed
   - When `mode: OFF`: Set sidecar injection label to `false`

4. Fluent Bit Reconciler
   - When `mode: AUTO`: Apply sidecar injection only if detection logic confirms Istio is needed
   - When `mode: OFF`: Set sidecar injection label to `false`

5. NetworkPolicy Reconcilers
   - When `mode: AUTO`: Include Istio Envoy port (15090) in ingress rules only if detection logic confirms Istio is needed
   - When `mode: OFF`: Omit Istio Envoy port (15090) from ingress rules

### Validation

> The admission webhook enforces additional validation:

Reviewer 2: Do we really want to add an admission webhook  for the Telemetry CR to have these warnings in case the istio.mode is set to off?
I thought we agreed to just have a clear documentation for the consequences when the istio.mode is off

Author: Yes, you are right, validation section removed

| Resource                | Behavior                                                           | Rationale                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 
|-------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Pod Annotation          | `sidecar.istio.io/interceptionMode: TPROXY`                        | This annotation is ineffective in the current configuration because `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeInboundPorts: ""` disables all inbound interception. TPROXY only affects traffic that is intercepted by the sidecar.                                                                          |

> | Pod Annotation          | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeInboundPorts: ""`                 | The Gateway receives telemetry data on OTLP ports (4317, 4318) from both in-mesh and out-of-mesh clients. Excluding all inbound ports from sidecar interception allows direct connections without requiring mTLS, improving ingestion performance and compatibility.                               | 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Pod Annotation          | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeInboundPorts: ""`                 | The Gateway receives telemetry data on OTLP ports (4317, 4318) from both in-mesh and out-of-mesh clients. Excluding all inbound ports from sidecar interception allows direct connections without requiring mTLS, improving ingestion performance.                               | 
```

| PeerAuthentication      | PERMISSIVE mTLS mode                                               | This resource is ineffective in the current configuration because `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeInboundPorts: ""` bypasses all inbound traffic interception. The sidecar never processes inbound OTLP traffic, so the PeerAuthentication policy has no effect. The Gateway receives all telemetry data directly without mTLS enforcement.                                        |        

> | DestinationRule         | `TLS mode: DISABLE` for all OTLP Services                          | The Gateway Services (OTLP ingress endpoints) use node-local routing where clients connect to the same-node Gateway pod without encryption. Other telemetry components and application workloads must reach these endpoints over plain-text, so TLS is disabled for client-to-Gateway connections. |      

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| DestinationRule         | `TLS mode: DISABLE` for all OTLP Services                          | The Gateway Services (OTLP ingress endpoints) use node-local routing where clients connect to the same-node Gateway pod without encryption. Application workloads must reach these endpoints over plain-text, so TLS is disabled for client-to-Gateway connections. |      
```

Reviewer 2: There are no other telemetry components sending data to gateway

| NetworkPolicy (Ingress) | Additionally permits traffic on Istio Envoy telemetry port (15090) | The Gateway's sidecar exposes Envoy metrics on port 15090. Monitoring systems with the pod label `networking.kyma-project.io/metrics-scraping: allowed` can scrape these metrics to observe the Gateway's sidecar metrics and health.                                                         |     
| OTel Processor          | `istio_enrichment` (log pipelines only when OTel log agent is used) | Enriches log entries with Istio service mesh metadata (service names, workload identifiers, mesh configuration). Only applied to log pipelines when using the OTel log agent (not Fluent Bit).                                                                                                 |
| OTel Processor          | `istio_noise_filter` (all pipelines: logs, traces, metrics)        | Filters out noisy Istio-related telemetry data (health check spans, internal mesh metrics, verbose Envoy logs) to reduce data volume and improve signal quality.                                                                                                                              |     

#### Metric Agent

> The Metric Agent is deployed as a DaemonSet and scrapes Prometheus metrics from workloads in the cluster, then forwards them to configured backends.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Metric Agent is deployed as a DaemonSet and collects Prometheus, runtime or istio metrics, then forwards them to configured backends.
```

|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Pod Label                | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"`                                                  | The Metric Agent forwards scraped metrics to backends. When backends are in-cluster services within the Istio mesh with STRICT mTLS policies, the Agent needs the sidecar to establish mTLS connections for output. Additionally, when Prometheus input is enabled, the sidecar injects Istio certificates that the Agent uses to scrape workloads with STRICT mTLS policies.                                          |

> | Prometheus Scrape Config | `app-services` job scrapes services with `prometheus.io/scrape: "true"` annotation | The Metric Agent must scrape application metrics from workloads that expose plain-text Prometheus endpoints. When Prometheus input is enabled, this job drops HTTPS targets (identified by `security.istio.io/tlsMode: istio` pod label or `prometheus.io/scheme: https` service annotation) because those require mTLS certificates and are handled by the `app-services-secure` job instead. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Prometheus Scrape Config (Prometheus Input Enabled) | `app-services` job scrapes services with `prometheus.io/scrape: "true"` annotation | The Metric Agent must scrape application metrics from workloads that expose plain-text Prometheus endpoints. When Prometheus input is enabled, this job drops HTTPS targets (identified by `security.istio.io/tlsMode: istio` pod label or `prometheus.io/scheme: https` service annotation) because those require mTLS certificates and are handled by the `app-services-secure` job instead. |
```

> ##### Conditional (Only When Istio is Detected and Prometheus Input Enabled)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### Conditional (Only When Istio is Detected)
```

> | Prometheus Scrape Config | `app-services` job scrapes services with `prometheus.io/scrape: "true"` annotation | The Metric Agent must scrape application metrics from workloads that expose plain-text Prometheus endpoints. When Istio is detected and Prometheus input is enabled, this job drops HTTPS targets (identified by `security.istio.io/tlsMode: istio` pod label or `prometheus.io/scheme: https` service annotation) because those require mTLS certificates and are handled by the `app-services-secure` job instead. When Istio is not detected or Prometheus input is disabled, this job scrapes all targets. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Prometheus Scrape Config | `app-services` job scrapes services with `prometheus.io/scrape: "true"` annotation | The Metric Agent must scrape application metrics from workloads that expose plain-text Prometheus endpoints. When Prometheus input is enabled, this job drops HTTPS targets (identified by `security.istio.io/tlsMode: istio` pod label or `prometheus.io/scheme: https` service annotation) because those require mTLS certificates and are handled by the `app-services-secure` job instead. |
```

Reviewer 2: Currently, the job have these configuration regardless of whether istio is detected or not

> | OTel Processor           | `istio_noise_filter` (metric pipelines)                                                               | Filters out noisy Istio-related metrics (verbose Envoy metrics, internal mesh control plane data) to reduce data volume and improve signal quality for metric pipelines.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| OTel Processor (Istio Input Enabled) | `istio_noise_filter` (metric pipelines)                                                               | Filters out noisy Istio-related metrics (verbose Envoy metrics, internal mesh control plane data) to reduce data volume and improve signal quality for metric pipelines.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
```

| Pod Annotation           | `sidecar.istio.io/userVolumeMount`                                                                    | This annotation mounts the Istio certificate volume into the sidecar container so the sidecar can write certificates to the shared location.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

> | Prometheus Scrape Config | `app-services-secure` job scrapes HTTPS targets with TLS config pointing to `/etc/istio-output-certs` | The Metric Agent must scrape application workloads with STRICT mTLS policies that require client certificates. This job uses the Istio certificates from the sidecar to authenticate when scraping these protected endpoints, keeping only HTTPS targets.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Prometheus Scrape Config (Prometheus Input Enabled) | `app-services-secure` job scrapes HTTPS targets with TLS config pointing to `/etc/istio-output-certs` | The Metric Agent must scrape application workloads with STRICT mTLS policies that require client certificates. This job uses the Istio certificates from the sidecar to authenticate when scraping these protected endpoints, keeping only HTTPS targets.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
```

| OTel Processor           | `istio_noise_filter` (metric pipelines)                                                               | Filters out noisy Istio-related metrics (verbose Envoy metrics, internal mesh control plane data) to reduce data volume and improve signal quality for metric pipelines.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

**Key Behavior**: The `app-services` and `app-services-secure` jobs work together to provide complete coverage:

> - `app-services`: Always configured. Scrapes workloads that expose plain-text Prometheus metrics (drops `https` targets).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `app-services`: Configured when Prometheus input is enabled. Scrapes workloads that expose plain-text Prometheus metrics (drops `https` targets).
```

##### Unconditional (Always Applied)

| Resource       | Behavior                                               | Rationale                                                                                                                                                          |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Pod Label      | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"`                      | The OTel Log Agent forwards collected logs to backends. When backends are in-cluster services within the Istio mesh with STRICT mTLS policies, the Agent needs the sidecar to establish mTLS connections for output.                  |
| Pod Annotation | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/excludeInboundPorts: "8888"` | The OTel Log Agent exposes its own Prometheus metrics on port 8888. Monitoring systems (Self-Monitor) need to scrape these metrics directly without requiring mTLS, so this port is excluded from sidecar interception. |

> | OTel Processor          | `istio_noise_filter` (log pipelines)                              | Filters out noisy Istio-related logs (verbose Envoy access logs, internal mesh control plane logs, health check logs) to reduce data volume and improve signal quality for log pipelines.                                                                     |

Reviewer 2: Are you sure that the log agent has the `istio_noise_filter` processor? If not, please remove it from here

Author: removed, only log gateway has the processor

|----------------|-------------------|--------------------------------|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| OTLP Gateway   | Always enabled    | Not used                       | None                          | DestinationRule (TLS DISABLE), PeerAuthentication PERMISSIVE mTLS mode |
| Metric Agent   | Always enabled    | Conditional (Prometheus input) | Conditional (traffic routing) | None                                                                   |
| OTel Log Agent | Always enabled    | Not used                       | None                          | None                                                                   |
| Fluent Bit     | Always enabled    | Not used                       | None                          | None                                                                   |
| Self-Monitor   | Always disabled   | Not used                       | None                          | None                                                                   |

## Proposed Solution

### API Schema

Add an `istio` field to the Telemetry CR spec with a single mode control:

```yaml
spec:
  istio:

>     mode: <On | IngestOnly | ExportOnly | Off>  # Default: Phase 1: On, Phase 2: IngestOnly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
spec:
  istio:
    trafficInterception: <On | PrometheusInputScrapeOnly | ExportOnly | Off>  # Default: Phase 1: On, Phase 2: IngestOnly
```

>     trafficInterception: <On | ScrapeOnly | ExportOnly | Off>  # Default: Phase 1: On, Phase 2: IngestOnly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    trafficInterception: <On | PrometheusInputScrapeOnly | ExportOnly | Off>  # Default: Phase 1: On, Phase 2: PrometheusInputScrapeOnly
```

| Resource                | Behavior                                                           | Rationale                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 
|-------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Pod Annotation          | `sidecar.istio.io/interceptionMode: TPROXY`                        | This annotation is ineffective in the current configuration because `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeInboundPorts: ""` disables all inbound interception. TPROXY only affects traffic that is intercepted by the sidecar.                                                                          |

> | Pod Annotation          | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeInboundPorts: ""`                 | The Gateway receives telemetry data on OTLP ports (4317, 4318) from both in-mesh and out-of-mesh clients. Excluding all inbound ports from sidecar interception allows direct connections without requiring mTLS, improving ingestion performance and compatibility.                               | 

Reviewer: We decided that using Istio on the ingestion is a heavy bottleneck and with node-local communication it is not needed. So we explicitly disable the usage of mtls by applying a DestinationRule and so we can just disable interception on ingest overall as all traffic will be plain text anyway.

Author: We bypass incoming traffic in both cases ingestion/export

> | PeerAuthentication      | PERMISSIVE mTLS mode                                               | The Gateway must accept telemetry from clients that cannot provide mTLS certificates (out-of-mesh workloads, legacy clients). PERMISSIVE mode allows both plain-text and mTLS connections, supporting the Gateway's role as a universal ingress point.                                             |        

Reviewer: It is not needed anymore, see annotation above. This resource is ineffective in the current configuration because we do not intercept ingest traffic.

Author: tables and summary updated

#### Metric Agent

The Metric Agent is deployed as a DaemonSet and scrapes Prometheus metrics from workloads in the cluster, then forwards them to configured backends.

##### Unconditional (Always Applied)

| Resource                 | Behavior                                                                           | Rationale                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | Pod Label                | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"`                                                  | The Metric Agent forwards scraped metrics to backends. When backends are in-cluster services within the Istio mesh with STRICT mTLS policies, the Agent needs the sidecar to establish mTLS connections for output.                                          |

Reviewer: We also need the sidecar for client certificate injection, so that the prometheus input will work in istio mode

Author: listed in the conditional table

> | Prometheus Scrape Config | `app-services` job scrapes services with `prometheus.io/scrape: "true"` annotation | The Metric Agent must scrape application metrics from workloads that expose plain-text Prometheus endpoints. This job handles non-mTLS targets by dropping HTTPS endpoints (which require certificates the Agent doesn't have when Istio input is disabled). |

Reviewer: And the dropping is based on a Istio label/annotation of name xxx

Author: Drop based on container name `istio-proxy` and scheme `https`, will update table

##### Conditional (Only When Istio is Detected and Prometheus Input Enabled)

| Resource                 | Behavior                                                                                              | Rationale                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | Pod Annotation           | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundIPRanges: ""`                                                | This annotation bypasses the sidecar for direct access to Istio control plane metrics (istiod, Envoy sidecar metrics). Not needed for scraping application Prometheus metrics (handled by `app-services` and `app-services-secure`).                                                              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Pod Annotation           | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundIPRanges: ""`                                                | This annotation disables Istio outbound traffic interception for scraping of envoy and application metrics via the prometheus receiver. For envoy metrics there is no mtls support, for in-mesh apps we use manual mtls using the injected client certs (real mtls with interception will not work as we are calling pod IPs directly), for outer-mesh apps we don't need mtls..                                                              |
```
Is there anywhere explained why we use the manual mtls approach for in-mesh scraping?

Reviewer 2: @a-thaler in your suggestion, I think you meant `outbound traffic` and not `inbound traffic`, right?

Reviewer: fixed

> | Pod Annotation           | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundPorts: "{backend_ports}"`                                    | The Metric Agent forwards scraped metrics to configured backends. When backends are in-cluster services in the Istio mesh, traffic to their ports must route through the sidecar for mTLS. The Agent dynamically populates this annotation with backend ports from MetricPipeline configurations. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Pod Annotation           | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundPorts: "{backend_ports}"`                                    | The Metric Agent forwards scraped metrics to configured backends. When backends are in-cluster services in the Istio mesh, traffic to their ports must route through the sidecar for mTLS. The Agent dynamically populates this annotation with backend ports from MetricPipeline configurations. Setting this annotation on its own doesn't mean that the outbound traffic to other ports will be excluded from being routed through the sidecar, so we still need to set the annotation `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundIPRanges: ""`. For more details, check https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/32677#issuecomment-2489911313 |
```

##### Unconditional (Always Applied)

| Resource  | Behavior                           | Rationale                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|-----------|------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Pod Label | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "false"` | The Self-Monitor scrapes metrics only from Telemetry components within the same namespace (kyma-system) over plain-text connections. These targets do not require mTLS authentication. Disabling sidecar injection reduces resource overhead since the Self-Monitor never needs to communicate with in-mesh services. |

##### Conditional (Only When Istio is Detected)

The system creates no Istio-specific resources for the Self-Monitor because it explicitly disables sidecar injection.

### Summary

> | Component      | Sidecar Injection | Istio Certificates | Special Annotations           | Istio-Specific Resources       |

Reviewer: The PeerAuthentication is still there and should be mentioned in the summary

Author: Will be added also here

Reviewer 2: I still can't see the PeerAuthentication in the summary table of the current status

> | Component      | Sidecar Injection | Istio Certificates | Special Annotations           | Istio-Specific Resources       |

Reviewer: In the "current status" till here, the noise processor and alike is not mentioned at all. I thought till here, we want to have a summary of the current situation? Why the noise processor is mentioned only in the proposed solution?

Author: the processors listed in the tables

### API Behavior by Component

This section describes how each component behaves under different `istio.mode` configurations. Each table shows the exact Istio resources, annotations, and behavior for every combination of mode and Istio presence.

#### OTLP Gateway

The OTLP Gateway receives telemetry data on OTLP ports (4317 gRPC, 4318 HTTP) and forwards it to configured backends.

| Mode         | Sidecar Injection                  | Pod Annotations                                   | Istio Resources                                      |
|--------------|-------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|
| `On`         | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"`  | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeInboundPorts: ""` | DestinationRule (TLS DISABLE), NetworkPolicy (15090) |
| `IngestOnly` | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "false"` | (none)                                            | (none)                                               |

> | `ExportOnly` | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"`  | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeInboundPorts: ""` | DestinationRule (TLS DISABLE), NetworkPolicy (15090) |

Reviewer: The Destination rule we only need for the Ingest scenario!! Don't we? So only have it in the two upper scnarios.

Author: When we inject the sidecar only for the export scenario, we still need to allow ingestion function for non-mesh workloads

| `Off`        | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "false"` | (none)                                            | (none)                                               |

#### Metric Agent (Prometheus Input Disabled)

| Mode         | Sidecar Injection                  | Pod Annotations                                                                                                                              | Istio Resources       | Prometheus Receivers |
|--------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|----------------------|

> | `On`         | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"`  | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/excludeInboundPorts: "8888"`, `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundPorts: "{backend_ports}"`                  | NetworkPolicy (15090) | (none)               |

Reviewer: Is there any inbound traffic which we want to intercept? I guess not, why not just setting traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeInboundPorts: "" like for the gateway?

Author: Only inbound traffic is required, the metric emitting

#### Metric Agent (Istio Input Enabled)  

When at least one MetricPipeline has `input.istio.enabled: true`, the Metric Agent scrapes Istio control plane metrics (istiod, Envoy sidecars). This feature is independent of Prometheus input.

**Pod Annotation `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundIPRanges: ""`**:
- **Required when**: `input.istio.enabled: true` and mode is `On` or `ExportOnly` (sidecar injected)
- **NOT required when**: Mode is `IngestOnly` or `Off` (no sidecar, so annotation has no effect)
- **Purpose**: Bypasses the sidecar to allow direct access to Istio control plane metrics endpoints (istiod, Envoy sidecars)

| Mode         | Sidecar Injection                  | Additional Annotations (for Istio scraping)              |
|--------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|

> | `On`         | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"`  | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundIPRanges: ""`   |

Reviewer: If we really need the annotation, then it is also relevant for the prometheus scrape scenario and the annotations listed in the prometheus scenario are relevant here as well, like the backend port enablement.
Maybe we can indeed combine it somehow?

Author: This required when only istio input is enabled and and ingestion mode required

Reviewer 2: By `ingestion mode required`, you mean sidecar is injected, right? and not the `IngestOnly` mode is on

**Migration Strategy**:

1. **Announce change**: Provide advance notice (at least 2 releases) that the default mode will change to `IngestOnly`
2. **Audit tooling**: Provide a command or script that checks existing clusters for:
   - Istio presence
   - Pipelines with cluster-internal output URLs
   - Generates recommended Telemetry CR configurations
3. **Documentation**: Update all examples and guides to show explicit mode configuration

**Phase 2 Benefits**:
- **Resource efficiency for common case**: Most users send to external backends and won't pay sidecar overhead
- **Explicit export configuration**: Users consciously decide when to integrate with Istio mesh for export
- **Cleaner defaults**: New clusters start with minimal overhead for export while maintaining ingestion functionality

**Phase 2 Breaking Changes**:
- Existing Telemetry CRs without explicit `istio.mode` configuration will have export Istio disabled after upgrade

**Timeline**:
- **Phase 1**: Immediate implementation (`mode: On` default)
- **Phase 2**: After Phase 1 has been stable (`mode: IngestOnly` default)

> ### Backward Compatibility

Reviewer: Does that section bring value on top of the previous section?

Author: Agree, I will remove this section

---
title: Istio Mode Configuration API
status: Proposed
date: 2026-06-10
related:
  - https://github.com/kyma-project/telemetry-manager/issues/3549
  - https://github.com/kyma-project/telemetry-manager/issues/657
---

# Istio Mode Configuration API

## Context and Problem Statement

> Telemetry Manager currently auto-detects Istio by checking for Istio CRDs (`*.istio.io`) in the cluster and automatically applies Istio-specific resources when detected. This includes sidecar injection labels, DestinationRules, traffic routing annotations, and certificate volume mounts across telemetry components (OTLP Gateway, Metric Agent, OTel Log Agent, Fluent Bit, and Self-Monitor).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Telemetry Manager currently auto-detects Istio by checking for Istio CustomResourceDefinitions (CRDs) (`*.istio.io`) in the cluster and automatically applies Istio-specific resources when detected. This includes sidecar injection labels, DestinationRules, traffic routing annotations, and certificate volume mounts across telemetry components (OTLP Gateway, Metric Agent, OTel Log Agent, Fluent Bit, and Self-Monitor).
```

- All-or-nothing approach: The current design does not allow granular control. Users cannot selectively enable Istio mode for specific components or use cases (such as backends requiring in-cluster mTLS).

- Migration difficulty: To move toward an "Istio mode off by default" model (tracked in issue [#657](https://github.com/kyma-project/telemetry-manager/issues/657)), the system requires a backward-compatible transition path that preserves existing behavior while allowing explicit opt-in configuration.

Users need an explicit API mechanism to control when and how Istio integration applies to telemetry components. This addresses issue [#3549](https://github.com/kyma-project/telemetry-manager/issues/3549), which proposes an explicit configuration model that supports eventual migration to an opt-in default while maintaining backward compatibility during the transition.

### Current Behavior

### Istio Detection

> The Telemetry Manager automatically detects Istio by checking for the presence of Istio CRDs (Custom Resource Definitions) in the cluster. Specifically, it looks for API groups matching `*.istio.io`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Telemetry Manager automatically detects Istio by checking for Istio CRDs in the cluster. Specifically, it looks for API groups matching `*.istio.io`.
```

| `ExportOnly`                | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"`  | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/excludeInboundPorts: "8888"`, `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundPorts: "{backend_ports}"`                                                              | NetworkPolicy (15090)                                     | `app-services` (all targets)                                     |
| `Off`                       | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "false"` | (none)                                                                                                                                                                                  | (none)                                                    | `app-services` (all targets)                                     |

#### Metric Agent (Istio Input Enabled)  

When at least one MetricPipeline has `input.istio.enabled: true`, the Metric Agent scrapes Istio control plane metrics (istiod, Envoy sidecars). This feature is independent of Prometheus input.

**Pod Annotation `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundIPRanges: ""`**:

> - **Required when**: `input.istio.enabled: true` and trafficInterception is `On`, `ExportOnly`, or `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` (sidecar injected)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Required when**: `input.istio.enabled: true` and sidecar is injected which will happen when trafficInterception is `On`, `ExportOnly`, or `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` (while Prometheus input is enabled)
```

> - **NOT required when**: trafficInterception is `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` or `Off` (no sidecar, so annotation has no effect, no prometheus input enabled)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

let's remove this part, is it enough to describe when it is only required

- **Purpose**: Bypasses the sidecar to allow direct access to Istio control plane metrics endpoints (istiod, Envoy sidecars)

| trafficInterception         | Sidecar Injection                  | Additional Annotations (for Istio scraping)            |
|-----------------------------|------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| `On`                        | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"`  | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundIPRanges: ""` |

> | `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "false"` | (none)                                                 |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` (Prometheus input disabled) | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "false"` | (none)                                                 |
```

> | `ExportOnly`                | `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"`  | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeOutboundIPRanges: ""` |

Reviewer 2: we should add another row in the table which describes the situation for: `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` (Prometheus input enabled)

Author: table updated

| `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` |  `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "false"` | (none)                                                       | (none)                |
| `ExportOnly` |  `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"`  | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/excludeInboundPorts: "2020, 2021"` | NetworkPolicy (15090) |
| `Off`        |  `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "false"` | (none)                                                       | (none)                |

### Istio Processors

**Important**: The `istio_enrichment` and `istio_noise_filter` OTel processors are **independent** from the `trafficInterception` setting. Components configure these processors according to the specifications below, regardless of trafficInterception:

| Component | `istio_enrichment` | `istio_noise_filter` | Notes |
|-----------|-------------------|---------------------|-------|
| OTLP Gateway | Log pipelines only (when OTel log agent is used) | All pipelines (logs, traces, metrics) | Enriches logs with service mesh metadata. Filters noisy Istio telemetry. |
| Metric Agent | Not configured | Metric pipelines | Filters noisy Istio-related metrics. |

> | OTel Log Agent | Not configured | Log pipelines | Filters noisy Istio-related logs. |

Reviewer 2: the log agent doesn't have an `istio_noise_filter `, right? if not, please adjust his row

Author: removed

### Migration Strategy

The proposed API provides a two-phase migration path. Metric Agent Prometheus scraping capability stays enabled by default while export becomes opt-in. This maintains backward compatibility during the transition.

#### Phase 1: Introduce API with Default trafficInterception On

**Goal**: Provide explicit control while preserving existing behavior

**Changes**:
- We add an `istio.trafficInterception` field with `On | PrometheusInputScrapeOnly | ExportOnly | Off` values
- The default is `On`, which ensures backward compatibility with existing behavior
- Users explicitly set the trafficInterception value to control Metric Agent Prometheus scraping and export independently

**Benefits**:
- **Simple single-field API**: One trafficInterception field controls all Istio integration aspects
- **Clear semantics**: `On` (everything), `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` (only Metric Agent Prometheus scraping), `ExportOnly` (only export sidecars), `Off` (nothing)
- **Flexible control**: Users can enable Istio for Metric Agent Prometheus scraping only, export only, both, or neither

> - **Intelligent traffic routing**: When export is enabled and Istio is present, the system analyzes pipeline URLs to configure traffic routing annotations (cluster-internal URLs route through sidecar, external URLs bypass)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

we agreed we will not try to detect in-cluster backends from URL

- **Backward compatibility**: Default `On` ensures existing behavior is preserved
- **Natural progression**: Clear path from `On` → `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` for Phase 2 migration

**Limitations**:
- **Global application**: All components share the same trafficInterception (cannot enable Istio for only Gateway while disabling for Metric Agent)

> - **URL-based heuristic**: Cluster-internal URL detection might not capture all cases (for example, ServiceEntry-backed services)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

we agreed we will not try to detect in-cluster backends from URL

- **Minimal overhead when Prometheus input not used**: Only the Metric Agent gets sidecar injection when Prometheus input is enabled; all other components have no sidecars and minimal Istio configuration
- **User expectations**: Prometheus scraping of mTLS workloads is expected to "just work" when both Istio and Telemetry Manager are installed

**Rationale for Disabling Export by Default**:
- **Resource efficiency**: Export mode injects sidecars into all telemetry components, adding significant resource overhead
- **Explicit opt-in for mesh integration**: Users should consciously decide when to integrate telemetry components into the Istio mesh for export
- **Most common use case**: Many users send telemetry to external backends that don't require Istio mTLS

**Migration Strategy**:

1. **Announce change**: Provide advance notice (at least 2 releases) that the default trafficInterception will change to `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly`
2. **Audit tooling**: Provide a command or script that checks existing clusters for:
   - Istio presence
   - Pipelines with cluster-internal output URLs
   - Generates recommended Telemetry CR configurations

> 3. **Documentation**: Update all examples and guides to show explicit trafficInterception configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Documentation**: Update all examples and guides to show explicit trafficInterception configuration
```

We didn't discuss at all this audit tooling, let's remove it from the ADR

- **Backward compatibility**: The two-phase migration preserves existing behavior during Phase 1, preventing unexpected breakage
- **Resource efficiency**: Phase 2 reduces resource overhead for users who send telemetry to external backends and don't need export Istio mode
- **Clear semantics**: The four values (`On`, `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly`, `ExportOnly`, `Off`) provide intuitive, self-documenting configuration
- **Preserved functionality**: Metric Agent Prometheus scraping remains enabled by default in Phase 2, preserving the ability to scrape mTLS workloads without user intervention
- **Flexible migration path**: Users can optimize their configuration before Phase 2 by explicitly setting `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` to save sidecar overhead if backends are external

### Negative Consequences

- **Global application**: All components share the same `trafficInterception` setting. Users cannot selectively enable Istio for specific components (for example, enable for Gateway but disable for Metric Agent). This limitation is acceptable because most users need consistent Istio integration across all components.

> - **URL-based heuristic**: The system infers cluster-internal backends from URLs to configure traffic routing annotations, which might not capture all cases (for example, cluster-external URLs routed internally via DNS or ServiceEntry-backed services). Users must understand this limitation when configuring export backends.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

we agreed we will not try to detect in-cluster backends from URL

> - **Phase 2 breaking change**: Users who rely on implicit export Istio mode must explicitly set `trafficInterception: On` after the Phase 2 upgrade. Migration tooling and advance notice (at least 2 releases) mitigate this risk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Phase 2 breaking change**: Users who rely on implicit export Istio mode must explicitly set `trafficInterception: On` after the Phase 2 upgrade. Advance notice (at least 2 releases) mitigate this risk.
```

- **Migration complexity**: The two-phase approach requires careful communication and documentation to ensure users understand the timeline and required actions.

### Removed Istio Resources

> The following Istio resources are no longer needed and have been removed from the OTLP Gateway configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following Istio resources are no longer needed and should be removed from the OTLP Gateway configuration:
```

They are not removed yet

#### PeerAuthentication Resource

**Previous behavior**: The Gateway applied a PeerAuthentication resource with PERMISSIVE mTLS mode when Istio was detected.

> **Why it's no longer needed**: The `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeInboundPorts: ""` annotation already bypasses all inbound traffic interception by the sidecar. Because the sidecar never intercepts inbound OTLP traffic (ports 4317, 4318), the PeerAuthentication resource has no effect. The Gateway receives all telemetry data directly without mTLS enforcement, making the explicit PERMISSIVE policy redundant.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Why it's no longer needed**:  The `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeInboundPorts: ""` annotation was added to bypass all inbound traffic interception by the sidecar for better performance. This means that the PeerAuthentication has currently no effect because the traffic goes directly to the application container, bypassing the sidecar entirely. To allow clients inside the service mesh to push telemetry data to the Gateway when it has the sidecar injected, a DestinationRule with `TLS mode: DISABLE` has already been introduced.
```

Automatic detection provides convenience. However, users face several operational challenges:

- No explicit control: Users have no way to disable Istio mode when they don't need it. This causes sidecar containers, certificate management, and Istio-specific network policies to create unnecessary resource overhead.

- Unconditional artifacts: Telemetry Manager applies some Istio-related behaviors unconditionally, regardless of whether it detects Istio. For example, all components (except Self-Monitor) always have `sidecar.istio.io/inject: "true"` and the Metric Agent always mounts Istio certificate volumes, even when Istio integration is not required.

- All-or-nothing approach: The current design does not allow granular control. Users cannot selectively enable Istio mode for specific components or use cases (such as backends requiring in-cluster mTLS).

> - Migration difficulty: To move toward an "Istio mode off by default" model (tracked in issue #657), the system requires a backward-compatible transition path that preserves existing behavior while allowing explicit opt-in configuration.

Reviewer 2: The issue link is not clickable anymore

Author: linked

> Users need an explicit API mechanism to control when and how Istio integration applies to telemetry components. This addresses issue #3549, which proposes an explicit configuration model that supports eventual migration to an opt-in default while maintaining backward compatibility during the transition.

Reviewer 2: The issue link is not clickable anymore

Author: linked

| Fluent Bit     | Always enabled    | Not used                       | None                          | None                                                                   |
| Self-Monitor   | Always disabled   | Not used                       | None                          | None                                                                   |

## Considered Option

### Single `trafficInterception` field with four values

Add an `istio.trafficInterception` field to the Telemetry CR spec with four values: `On`, `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly`, `ExportOnly`, `Off`.

**Pros:**
- Simple, intuitive API with clear semantics
- Single field is easier for users to understand than multiple fields
- Covers all meaningful combinations (everything, scraping-only, export-only, nothing)
- Backward-compatible migration path through phased default change
- Natural progression from `On` → `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` for Phase 2

**Cons:**
- Global application: All components share the same setting (cannot enable Istio for only Gateway while disabling for Metric Agent)

> - URL-based heuristic for inferring cluster-internal backends might not capture all cases (for example, ServiceEntry-backed services)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

We decided that we will not be inferring cluster-internal backends.

## Decision

> We adopt **Option 1: a single `trafficInterception` field** with four values (`On`, `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly`, `ExportOnly`, `Off`). This design balances simplicity and flexibility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We adopt a single `trafficInterception` field with four values (`On`, `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly`, `ExportOnly`, `Off`). This design balances simplicity and flexibility.
```

**Rationale:**
- The single-field design is intuitive for users: `On` means "use Istio if available for everything," `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` means "use Istio only for Metric Agent Prometheus scraping," `ExportOnly` means "use Istio only for export," and `Off` means "never use Istio."
- The four values cover all meaningful combinations while keeping the API simple.

> - The two-phase migration provides a backward-compatible transition path that addresses user demand for explicit control (issue #3549) while preserving existing behavior during the transition.

Reviewer 2: The issue link is not clickable anymore

Author: linked

- **Backward compatibility**: Default `On` ensures existing behavior is preserved
- **Natural progression**: Clear path from `On` → `PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` for Phase 2 migration

**Limitations**:
- **Global application**: All components share the same trafficInterception (cannot enable Istio for only Gateway while disabling for Metric Agent)
- **URL-based heuristic**: Cluster-internal URL detection might not capture all cases (for example, ServiceEntry-backed services)

**Migration for Existing Clusters**:

For clusters with Istio:
- **No action needed**: The default `trafficInterception: On` preserves current behavior
- **Optional optimization**: Users can set `trafficInterception: PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` to save sidecar overhead if backends are external, or `trafficInterception: Off` to disable Istio entirely

For clusters without Istio:
- **No action needed**: Detection logic checks for Istio CRDs before applying configurations
- **Optional explicit configuration**: Users can set `trafficInterception: Off` to document intent

#### Phase 2: Change Default trafficInterception to PrometheusInputScrapeOnly

> **Goal**: Make export Istio mode opt-in by default while keeping Metric Agent Prometheus scraping enabled (addresses issue #657)

Reviewer 2: the issue link is not clickable

Author: linked

2. **Audit tooling**: Provide a command or script that checks existing clusters for:
   - Istio presence
   - Pipelines with cluster-internal output URLs
   - Generates recommended Telemetry CR configurations
3. **Documentation**: Update all examples and guides to show explicit trafficInterception configuration

**Phase 2 Benefits**:
- **Resource efficiency for common case**: Most users send to external backends and won't pay sidecar overhead
- **Explicit export configuration**: Users consciously decide when to integrate with Istio mesh for export
- **Cleaner defaults**: New clusters start with minimal overhead for export and keep Metric Agent Prometheus scraping functionality enabled

**Phase 2 Breaking Changes**:
- Existing Telemetry CRs without explicit `istio.trafficInterception` configuration will have export Istio disabled after upgrade

**Timeline**:
- **Phase 1**: Immediate implementation (`trafficInterception: On` default)
- **Phase 2**: After Phase 1 has been stable (`trafficInterception: PrometheusInputScrapeOnly` default)

## Consequences

### Positive Consequences

> - **Explicit control**: Users gain explicit control over Istio integration (addresses issue #3549), allowing them to disable Istio mode when not needed

Reviewer 2: the issue link is not clickable

Author: linked

| Pod Annotation          | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/includeInboundPorts: ""`                | Excludes all inbound ports from Istio sidecar interception, ensuring direct access to OTLP ingestion endpoints without mTLS overhead.                                                                                                                         |
| PeerAuthentication      | PERMISSIVE mTLS mode                                              | This configuration supports both plain-text and mTLS connections to the OTLP Gateway. Applications can send data over plain-text because of node-local ingestion and can use mTLS communication.                                                              |
| DestinationRule         | `TLS mode: DISABLE` for all OTLP Services                         | Because other components must connect without requiring mTLS, the OTLP Gateway receives telemetry data over plain-text on the ingestion path because of node-local routing. Disabling TLS for client connections to these services supports this requirement. |

> | NetworkPolicy (Ingress) | Additionally allows traffic on Istio Envoy telemetry port (15090) | When Istio is present, the sidecar's Envoy proxy exposes metrics that monitoring systems must scrape.                                                                                                                                                         |

Reviewer: Istio Noise filter and istio enrichement gets activated by the gateway..

Author: documented in a separate section

| Pod Annotation           | `traffic.sidecar.istio.io/excludeInboundPorts: "8888"`             | Excludes the metrics port from Istio sidecar interception, ensuring that monitoring systems can scrape the Metric Agent's own metrics directly without mTLS overhead.                                                                                                 |
| Pod Annotation           | `proxy.istio.io/config`                                            | Configures the Istio sidecar to write TLS certificates to the shared volume at `/etc/istio-output-certs`, which the Metric Agent uses for mTLS scraping of application metrics.                                                                                       |
| Pod Annotation           | `sidecar.istio.io/userVolumeMount`                                 | Mounts the Istio certificate volume into the Istio sidecar container.                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

> | Prometheus Scrape Config | `app-services-secure` job                                           | Configures scraping for application services with STRICT mTLS policies using Istio certificates. The Metric Agent can scrape workloads in the Istio mesh that require mTLS authentication.                                                                            |

Reviewer: Whats with the istio label in the regular scrape job?

Author: added in to table

|----------------|-------------------|--------------------|-------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| OTLP Gateway   | Always enabled    | Not used           | None                          | DestinationRule (TLS DISABLE)  |
| Metric Agent   | Always enabled    | Always mounted     | Conditional (traffic routing) | None                           |
| OTel Log Agent | Always enabled    | Not used           | None                          | None                           |
| Fluent Bit     | Always enabled    | Not used           | None                          | None                           |
| Self-Monitor   | Always disabled   | Not used           | None                          | None                           |

## Proposed API

To provide explicit control over Istio integration, we propose adding an `istio` field to the Telemetry CR spec with separate ingestion and export controls. This design differentiates between ingestion (receiving or scraping telemetry data) and export (sending telemetry data to backends), while applying globally across all telemetry components.

### API Schema

```yaml
spec:
  istio:

>     ingestion: <On | Off>  # Default: On

Reviewer: We call our API elements "input". Isn't it confusing to talk about ingestion here?

Author: Agree, input and output are more aligned with the pipeline API, but we need an agreement for naming with team

    export: <On | Off>     # Default: On
```

### Mode Definitions

The `ingestion` and `export` fields control Istio integration independently across all components:

#### Ingestion Mode

Controls Istio integration for receiving or collecting telemetry data:

- **On** (Default): Enable Istio integration for ingestion paths for components that require it, **only when Istio CRDs are present in the cluster**.

>   - **Gateway**: If Istio CRDs detected, applies DestinationRule (TLS DISABLE) for OTLP services. Enables sidecar injection with traffic routing annotations (exclude inbound ports). If Istio CRDs not present, skips all Istio configurations.

Reviewer: WHat about noise filter and enrichement of istio access logs?

Author: both added in the doc with some description and proposal

>   - **Metric Agent**: If Istio CRDs detected AND **at least one MetricPipeline has `input.prometheus.enabled: true`**, mounts Istio certificates, configures `app-services-secure` Prometheus scrape job, applies traffic routing annotations for certificate access. Can scrape STRICT mTLS workloads. If Istio CRDs not present OR no MetricPipeline has Prometheus input enabled, skips Istio ingestion configurations.

Reviewer: What is with the regular scrape job, will the behaviour change?

Author: changes are documented

    - **External URL detected** (for example, `https://logs.external.com`): Skips Istio sidecar injection and traffic routing for that component (no mTLS needed for external backends).
  - **Per-component decision**: Each component (Gateway, Metric Agent, Log Agents) independently checks its pipelines' output URLs and enables Istio only if Istio CRDs are present AND at least one pipeline uses a cluster-internal backend.
  
- **Off**: Explicitly disable Istio integration for all export paths, regardless of Istio CRD presence.
  - **All Components**: Sets sidecar injection label to `"false"`. Components cannot send data to STRICT mTLS backends in the Istio mesh, even if they use cluster-internal URLs.

### Cluster-Internal URL Detection

The system detects cluster-internal URLs using the following patterns:

- **Kubernetes service DNS names**: 
  - `<service>.<namespace>.svc.cluster.local`
  - `<service>.<namespace>.svc`

>   - `<service>.<namespace>`

Reviewer: How to do the detection in practice? icke.de is a valid DNS name as well but does not mean that it is internal? On what the detection is based on?

Author: not required, this section removed
